---
layout: post
title: W1D3
categories: [101-CSS-Animation]
---

# Creative environments

<div class="quote callout">
  “You don't learn to walk by following rules. You learn by doing, and by falling over.” 
  <span>Richard Branson</span>
</div>

Today we're going to look at ways we can build and test our CSS animations. Before we get started with the coding, it's a good idea to make sure we have a workflow that makes it easy to get started.

There are a few approaches: developing in the browser, and developing offline (locally).

## In the browser

The simplest way to get going for small experiments is to develop online. A site I often use is [Codepen](Codepen.io). Another good one is [JS Fiddle](http://jsfiddle.net/).

For the rest of this course I'll be using [Codepen](http://codepen.io) for examples and it's worth being familiar with the way it works.

Codepen is a coding playground that involves an edit mode where you can make changes to HTML, CSS and JavaScript and see the results immediately. The screen is divided up into four areas. The preview content, the HTML area, CSS and JavaScript. Within each is a settings option that allows you to configure languages (Sass instead of CSS for example) and other cool stuff.

## Local development

For more involved projects, I prefer to develop offline. There are ways to do so that can be efficient and quicker than working in the browser.

### Basic option: Simple HTML/CSS

The most simple option is to create a HTML file *(filename.html)* and an associated CSS file *(filename.css)* and link the two in the HTML. This is ok, but can be slow with lots of flicking back and forth between the browser and the editor.

I've created a set of HTML and CSS files you can copy and use to begin creating. [Download them here](https://github.com/cssanimation/starter/archive/master.zip).

### Dreamweaver / Macaw / Muse / Coda / Sublime

You can of course use whatever tool you find comfortable to create web pages. All you really need is a text editor. Some other tools come with more fancy visual editing, and if that's your preference, go for it.

Personally I'd recommend trying to get to grips with the code. Understanding the way the CSS works will help when it comes to fixing issues, or creating more expressive effects that visual tools can provide.

### Gulp

If you're familiar with Github, Node and checking out code, you might want to set up a development enviroment on your own machine.

I am a big fan of Gulp. Being Node-based, it's very fast. Modules can be put together to process Sass into CSS, autoprefix for browser support and sync browsers so that you don't need to keep refreshing each time you update the code.

I've created [a Github repo](https://github.com/cssanimation/gulp-sass-starter) to make local development faster. If you're comfortable with using Git, etc, go ahead and clone it and follow the readme for setup instructions.

Do improve it if you wish and push the results back. Teamwork!

## In summary

As we progress through the month, feel free to try different ways to create your code. You might want to host it yourself, or you might prefer to use Codepen. Either is good. The main goal is to make sure you can get from idea to code as smoothly as you need to.

<div class="callout">

  <h2>Homework</h2>

  <p>Register with <a href="http://codepen.io">Codepen</a>. Have a go adding some HTML and CSS, and see how the results change in response. It's also a good idea to check out some of the featured Codepens on the home page, and see how it's done.</p>

  <p><em>Optional:</em> If you want to try local development, download local starting files:</p>

  <ul>
    <li>Basic option: <a href="https://github.com/cssanimation/starter/archive/master.zip">Project starter HTML/CSS files</a></li>
    <li>Advanced: <a href="https://github.com/cssanimation/gulp-sass-starter">Gulp &amp; Sass starter</a></li>
  </ul>

</div>


Tomorrow, we'll be talking about transitions!

{% include email-signoff.html %}
