---
layout: post
title: W2D2
categories: [101-CSS-Animation]
---

# 101W2D2 Transitions Properties

Yesterday we learned about the transition property, and saw it in action in the form of a simple hover effect. Today we'll take a look at the properties that go into transitions and cover what they mean.

## Shorthand vs Longhand

When writing CSS, we can often summarise multiple properties into one in a shorthand property. For example, padding written as shorthand might look like this:

  padding: 10px 20px 15px 25px;

This would be the equivalent of:

  padding-top: 10px;
  padding-right: 20px;
  padding-bottom: 15px;
  padding-left: 25px;

In the same way, we can write a transition as shorthand too:

  transition: all 0.5s 1s linear;

In this case, the shorthand corresponds to:

  transition: [property] [duration] [delay] [timing-function];

Each of these properties can be written individually:

  transition-property: all;
  transition-duration: 0.5s;
  transition-delay: 1s;
  transition-timing-function: linear;

Let's look at each of these properties.

#### transition-property

Usually stated first in the shorthand, this is the property that the browser will animate. To change the background for example, `background` could be used. It's also possible to use `all` to have all applicable CSS properties transition.

#### transition-duration

A `transition-duration` value tells the browser how long the transition will take. A transition-duration of 3s (three seconds) will be three times longer than a transition-duration of 1000ms. Again, the same time syntax applies here.

#### transition-delay

The `transition-delay` property tells the browser to wait before applying the transition. This is a time value, and it can be specified in seconds or milliseconds. For example, `3s` would be three seconds and `100ms` would be one hundred milliseconds. Equally, you could write that as `0.1s`. It's up to you.

#### transition-timing-function

Both transitions and animations make use of timing functions. There's a lot to these, so rather then try to cram it in here, we'll talk more about timing functions tomorrow. Timing functions can really add life to your animations and can make the difference between a boring, flat animation and one with bounce and style.

## Combining multiple transitions

Sometimes you may want a transition to apply a different duration or timing function to one property, and different duration to another. Multiple transitions can be used, separated by commas.

By combining multiple transitions we can create multiple, more nuanced effects. For example:

    transition: background 1s ease-out, font-size 0.5s linear;

The first transition here works on only the background, and the second (after the comma) only applies to font-size.

## Things transitions *don't* work on

While you can use transitions on positioning, size, colour, border, background-position and many others, there are some that cannot be transitioned. The font-family cannot be transitioned, as this would mean trying to generate frames between two very different font images.

Similarly, background images such as generated gradients cannot be transitioned. Once the browser generates the background gradient, it would have to regenerate it for each frame.

There are ways around this. You can animate opacity, and background position. For an example of this, you can see how the background is animated on the [Baymax in CSS](http://cssanimation.rocks/baymax/) article.

## Prefixes and browser compatibility

When I've given code examples, I've not included vendor prefixes. This is to make the code easier to read, but if you're using the code in production they are needed.

I like to use Autoprefixer (it's an option on Codepen), and can be run with build tools such as Grunt or Gulp. Alternately you can manually write them out like this:

  -webkit-transition: ...;
  -moz-transition: ...;
  transition: ...;

## Homework

I've created a basic Codepen to try out transitions:

http://codepen.io/donovanh/pen/NPYNGa?editors=110

Hover over the rectangle, and it should turn into a circle. However the change is sudden and there's no transition. Can you add a transition and make it more interesting?

(Press the "Fork" button to create your own version, and you can then save your work to your own Codepen account)

I'll look forward to seeing your ideas. Feel free to reply and show me what you can do!

Until tomorrow!

Donovan
CSSAnimation.rocks
@cssanimation