---
layout: post
title: W3D5 Animation Recap
categories: [101-CSS-Animation]
source: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/donovanh/animation-101-source/master/src/_posts/2015-03-01-101W3D5.md
---

# Animation recap

In the last 3 weeks covered a lot of stuff! I hope it's making sense.

It took me a while for this animation and keyframe stuff to click. If it's not clear yet, don't be put off. Keep at it, and bit by bit the various tricks of using animation in HTML and CSS will become clear.

Today we're going to take a moment to recap what we learned this week. But first, yesterday's homework challenge!

## Homework challenge: Traffic lights

Yesterday's challenge should be been easy. Well, it's easy if you know how. I've created an updated version of [the UK-based traffic light demo](http://codepen.io/donovanh/pen/ogRRdR?editors=010), this time changing the sequence to remove the "red + amber" stage.

[See it in action here](http://codepen.io/donovanh/pen/vEqbdw?editors=010). I've made the colour scheme match what Google suggested American traffic lights look like. Apologies if it's way off. ;)

Many thanks to everyone who had a go! 

## Recap: Animations

This week we looked at the `animation` property and how it works alongside `keyframes`.

### Like a transition, only different

While the animation property looks and works in a way that's similar to `transition`, it has some subtle differences. While a transition will only occur when an element changes, animations can begin straight away.

Using the various properties, animations can loop a certain number of times (or forever), and can even begin with a negative value for their delay. This starts the animation with it already having progressed.

By default, animations will play from start to finish, then jump back to their default state. We can have the animation freeze at it's end point by using the `animation-direction` property of `forwards`.

Animations use `timing-functions`, much like transitions. However, the timing function applies to each individual keyframe, **not** the entire set of keyframes. Instead, you can specify `animation-timing-function` within a keyframe for more granular control.

Finally, animations can be specified in shorthand, just like transitions:

    animation: keyframe-name 2s forwards linear;

### Keyframes

Every animation needs to reference a set of `keyframes`. These keyframes are a series of percentages, describing each "stage" of the animation. The browser fills in the gaps automatically.

Keyframes have their own shorthand (*to* and *from*) when you want to only go from one state to another.

Stacking percentages beside each other can have the animation "pause" at that stage.

Lastly, it's possible to omit the 0% keyframe and the browser will take the element's style as implied. For example, to have something fade away, we don't necessarily have to give it a starting `opacity` of 1 (assuming the element is already visible):

    @keyframes name {
      100% {
        opacity: 0;
      }
    }

## Putting them together

When we want to use an animation, we always have the two pieces:

    .element {
      animation: keyframe-name ...
    }
    @keyframes keyframe-name {
      ...
    }


<div class="callout">
  <h2>Homework</h2>
  <p>At this point we should be clear on the different between the `animation` poroperty and the `transition` property.</p>
  <p>Try digging through some of the <a href="http://codepen.io/collection/AxKOdY/">Principles of Animation for the Web</a> examples. Each is made entirely with HTML and CSS, using keyframe animation. Try forking one and see what you can do with it.</p>
</div>

**Next week:** We've learned about transitions, and we've learned about animations. Next week we'll take on some fun new demos, learn more about making sure we animate responsibly, and look at some interesting tools and JavaScript frameworks.

## Tell the world!

In the meantime, how about telling everyone how you're getting on? Here's a suggestion:

<div class="callout">
  <h4>Learning all about the "animation" CSS property with CSS Animation 101</h4>
  <p><a href="https://twitter.com/intent/tweet/?text=Learning%20all%20about%20the%20%22animation%22%20CSS%20property%20with%20CSS%20Animation%20101&url=https%3A%2F%2Fcssanimation.rocks%2Fcourses%2Fanimation-101%2F">Tweet this!</a></p>
</div>

{% include email-signoff.html %}
