---
layout: post
title: W1D1 Welcome
categories: [101-CSS-Animation]
---

# 101W1D1 Welcome

Welcome to the first email of the Getting Started with CSS Animation!

We've a busy month ahead, and I really hope you find it useful and interesting. Here's how it works.

P.S. If you're in a hurry, skip to the "Homework" section at the end!

## Week 1: An overview

In this first week, we'll start by understanding what transitions and animations are, and how they relate to web pages, without getting too caught up in the technical specifics.

Along the way I'll be sharing some sources for inspiration, and other resources to keep in mind to help get a good understanding of what animation can do for you.

## Week 2: Transitions

With knowledge of why we want to animate, and hopefully some ideas, we'll start looking at how animations work in CSS. This week we will focus on "transitions", and the way browsers animate between one state and another.

We'll go through some of the CSS properties used by transitions, how to control timing and create some examples along the way.

## Week 3: Keyframe animations

With transitions covered, we'll take a look at another way to create animations in browsers, keyframe animations.

We'll learn how animations differ from transitions and when you'd want to use an animation. Along the way we'll delve into the structure of keyframe sets and how to create your own. Along the way we'll create some more examples.

## Week 4: Taking it further

We'll have covered a lot of material by this point! Here we'll take time to review what we've learned, share some resources and bookmarks, and look into how we can go beyond CSS using JavaScript for more advanced animation in the browser.

## Expected knowledge

A basic understanding of CSS is required for this course. If you're new to CSS, it might be worth taking time to get familiar with the concepts before continuing. We won't be covering any code until next week, so there's still time to do a little bit of catching up!

Some online tools and resources you might find helpful:

* Interactive HTML/CSS tutorials: http://www.codeavengers.com/
* Learn to Code HTML&CSS http://learn.shayhowe.com/html-css/

## Codepen

I'll be using examples over at Codepen. If you want to make the most use of the examples, you'll need to register an account. I'd recommend signing up (http://codepen.io) anyway, it's a great service.

## Get in touch!

As we continue through this month, I want you to know that I'll be here at the end of the email. You can reply to any email with questions or thoughts. If possible, I'll try to reply in person, or failing that will put together an answer in the next day's email.

I'd also love to hear about your projects and ideas. Feel free to share!

## Homework

Some of the emails will end with a "homework" section. Here I'll suggest something you can do to prepare for the next day.

What's today's homework? How about taking a moment to reply to this email and tell me about yourself. What are you working on? What would you like to improve?

Until tomorrow,

Donovan
CSSAnimation.rocks
@cssanimation
