---
layout: post
title: W1D2
categories: [101-CSS-Animation]
---

# Why animate?

Life is movement. Whether we're staring into a fire, watching waves on the sea break on a beach, we're tuned to see and experience movement all around us.

Human beings are really good at spotting movement. I imagine it's something of an evolutionary benefit to be able to notice subtle cues. Whether it's hunting, or doing our best not to be hunted, catching movement can be a life saving skill.

We're really good at noticing and we enjoy movement. When we design a web site, we can make use of these facts to improve the way we communicate and bring life to our designs.

## Animating and the web

Animation has been around on the web for a long time. From simple text hover effects, to the massive popularity of Flash-based animations (complete with annoying "Loading" animations) and more recently we've been able to use Canvas, in-browser transitions and keyframe animations to create amazing effects.

Along with being entertaining, animation on the web is also a great tool that helps our designs communicate with our users. Google's [Material Design guidelines](http://www.google.com/design/spec/material-design/introduction.html#introduction-goals) do a great job of describing ways we can use real-world inspired animation to help users better understand and interact with content.

The payment company [Stripe](http://stripe.com) has had great success using combinations of subtle, beautifully designed animations to make their payment widget more appealing and pleasant to use.

We can use animation to tell stories to our users. Animation can show users how to use our products through step-by-step guides or overlays. We can show how a product is constructed, layer by layer, by animating each piece into place, and much of this can be done in-browser without any special plugins.

## In short

So why animate? A few reasons.

1) Animation is incredibly important to us as people
2) Using animation as a tool alongside colour, size and layout can help your designs communicate their intent
3) Nicely timed animations can add appeal, and credibility to your work
4) They can add a layer of fun and humanity, helping users identify with your designs

## Homework

[TODO]

## Questions

Email me back at this address (hello@cssanimation.rocks) or get in touch on Twitter (https://twitter.com/cssanimation).

{% include email-signoff.html %}

