---
layout: post
title: W2D1
categories: [101-CSS-Animation]
---

# 101W2D1 More about Transitions

Last week we talked about what animation on the web is, and why we might want to use it. We also discussed what makes a transition and what makes an animation. It's time to delve further into transitions and see some code!

## Transitions

To recap, transitions occur when an element changes from one state to another. Your browser draws the frames between each state automatically to create an animation.

We can write a transition in CSS like this:

  transition: background 0.5s linear;

In this example we're telling the browser that a transition of the background property, will take half a second, and use the "linear" timing function.

The above property might cause a button's background to change when hovered over:

button {
  background: red;
  transition: background 0.5s linear;
}

button:hover {
  background: green;
}

Notice that I've added the `transition` property to the default, non-hover state only. Because the transition is on the default state, the animation will apply when hover starts, but also when the mouse cursor is no longer hovering. Both directions.

If we applied the `transition` property to the hover state only, then it would only apply when the hover occurs and the change back to the default state would not be animated.

## Transition structure

[TODO]

## Homework

Before we get into the various properties used by transitions, let's practice creating one of our own. I've set up an example over at Codepen to get started:

http://codepen.io/donovanh/pen/MYQdZd

Look for these lines:

  transition-property: all;
  transition-duration: 0.4s;
  transition-timing-function: ease-out;

This code that tells the button what to do when a state changes. It tells the browser to animate all properties (colours, size, position), over a duration of 0.4 seconds.

Try changing some of these values. For example, change the "0.4s" to something longer, like "2s" (two seconds). How does the animation feel? You could change the property from "all" to "background".

### Bonus

Try changing the "transition-timing-function" value from "ease-out" to "cubic-bezier(.59,-0.26,.33,1.42)". We'll go into greater depth on what this means later.

{% include email-signoff.html %}
